---
author: andrew-ferguson
date: 2014-09-16 14:10:59+00:00
layout: post
slug: lets-play
title: "Let’s Play"
categories:
- Grad Student Research
tags:
- praxis program
- games
---

Hi. I’m Andrew Ferguson. Three years ago, while fighting my way through English Lit exam lists full of doorstop novels and deep-end theory, I decompressed with a hobby that seemed as far from literary scholarship as could be: watching other people play videogames online, in archived or livestreamed forms called Let’s Plays, or LPs. And, somewhere along the eighth time I saw _Final Fantasy VI_ utterly broken by players with skill levels I found previously unimaginable, I realized my two preoccupations weren’t all that dissimilar, with each having much to learn from the others&mdash;and, what’s more, that it was the literary that had much more to learn from the videogames than the other way around.

All that has now fed into my dissertation, “Let’s Play: Narrative Strategies and the Playerly Text,” attempts to read a variety of 20th/21st century novels through modes of videogame play. The authors covered range from Kathy Acker to Flann O’Brien to Colson Whitehead; the games from _Portal_ to _Pac-Man_ to _The Binding of Isaac_. There’s a few chunks out in the wild: on [Vladimir Nabokov’s _Pale Fire_ and _Super Mario Bros._](http://scholarworks.iu.edu/journals/index.php/textual/article/view/5052); and on [James Joyce’s _Finnegans Wake_ and _Metroid_](http://hjs.ff.cuni.cz/main/essays.php?essay=ferguson); the rest (knock wood) will be finished by the end of the year.

Upshot being, I spend a lot of time watching and thinking about different ways to play things; hence, I am inordinately excited to be part of this particular year’s Praxis cohort as we think through all the different ways we can build on last year’s superb [_Ivanhoe_ WordPress plug-in](http://ivanhoe.scholarslab.org/). But it’s not so much the case of leaving my own impression on a game with a distinguished lineage; rather it’s the chance to take part in something that mirrors the best of what I’ve seen in the LP community: a collective practice of building, critiquing, rebuilding, and gradually broadening the range of responses within texts and projects, as well as the practice itself and the composition of the community. It’s a mode of criticism that, even prior to joining this particular cohort, I have come to think of as “cohortative”&mdash;at once insistent, desirous, encouraging, and passionate.

Very much looking forward to getting to know everyone here, especially my colleagues&mdash;and discovering along with them new modes of play.
