author: alison-booth
date: 2019-08-06
layout: post
slug: Anne-Spencer-LAMI-project-StoryMap
title: "Harlem in Lynchburg: Stories about Space in a Summer Internship and the Jim Crow South"
categories:
- Digital Humanities
- LAMI 
- Spatial
- Cultural Heritage
- Segregation
---
	On July 25, I presented a paper that I had proposed in November for the ACH 2019 Conference in Pittsburgh, long before I had even heard of my co-author, Aleyshka Estevez Quintana, an English major at the University of Puerto Rico. It was too late to change the program, and anyway Aleyshka, one of the small group of undergraduates of color sponsored for a summer of research training under the Leadership Alliance Mellon Initiative (LAMI), couldn’t have come to Pittsburgh because she was presenting her own research on electronic literature and geolocated narratives at the national conference. Only because I had the good fortune to work eith Aleyshka as my mentee in June and July did I have anything more than wishful thinking to present in Pittsburgh. Thanks to Aleyshka, and the willing experts in the Scholars’ Lab, the future tense could shift to more confident "we have prototyped" our approaches to augmenting the collections associated with Anne Spencer, the Harlem Renaissance poet.  
“Harlem in Lynchburg: Anne Spencer’s House and Garden Project” was slated in a short-paper session, “The South,” with two excellent projects from Coastal Carolina University, with their Athenaeum Press: “Trans Voices of the South,” by Alli Crandell, Tripthi Pillai, Shonte Clement, Joshua Parsons (an oral history and printed collection of essays); and “Telling Hampton's Stories: Design and Production of Virtual Hampton's Spatial Vignettes,” by Susan Jean Bergeron and Crandell (a reconstruction in Unity of a rice plantation). The Coastal Carolina teams included undergraduate presenters of the results of pedagorical/research teamwork on race, gender and sexuality, geography/space, and interactive narratives—just what our project aspires to. I wished Aleyshka could have met Shonte and Joshua (undergraduate co-authors on Trans Voices of the South), and I wished she could have co-presented our timeline and mapping work. It calls for virtual teleconferencing, perhaps, but I tried to channel Aleyshka’s inventive research in my talk.
So, to give thanks where thanks are due, and share thoughts on what we hope to do. The Lynchburg residence of the Harlem Renaissance poet Anne Spencer (1882-1975) is a gem of vernacular architecture and garden design. It is curated (tours by appointment) by a grand-daughter of the poet, Shaun Spencer-Hester, with a foundation and board. The garden has been restored to peak condition and is open to the public at any time. Books of photographs and videos depict the landscape architecture and the house. The website links to a highly usable virtual tour of the house by Virginia Humanities (Google maps). Anne Spencer hosted and corresponded with many of the most famous African Americans of her day, and her poems appeared in all the notable anthologies in the decades of the Harlem Renaissance; with the rise of African American and feminist studies, she was again sought out. Although scholarship on Spencer is scant, there are full-length biographies by J. Lee Greene (1977) and Noelle Morrissette (UNC Greensboro; just now seeking a publisher); a memoir by Spencer’s son, Chauncey, and another by Carrie Allen McCray, the daughter of Anne Spencer’s close friend Mary Rice Hayes Allen, with whom Spencer co-founded the Lynchburg branch of the NAACP in 1919. 
Aleyshka and I, with Melinda Baumann, visited the museum and talked for two hours with Shaun Spencer-Hester on June 24. Aleyshka and I went through several boxes of the Spencer papers in Special Collections. After a workshop that Jeremy Boggs gave to LAMI students about narrative software tools, Aleyshka quickly laid out a sequence of events, places, and literary works using the knightlab.com Timeline3 software, posting it on her blog (http://www.alienliterature.com). We both read the biography by J. Lee Greene and I read the memoir, Who Is Chauncey Spencer? and McCray’s Freedom’s Child, which includes interviews in the 1970s with Anne Spencer. My work on the timeline included research on facts, adding “groups” (themes), images, events, and other material, and editing. We early on conceived of linking biographical annotations with rooms in the house and other sites accessible through the virtual tour. As we worked, we asked Jeremy, Drew Macqueen, and Chris Gist for help, and they were always ready to step forward. Drew, especially, met with us for hours as we worked through some of the snags in the latest version of arcgis StoryMaps, where we imbed the Timeline. Both data and design have a long way to go; we will continue to select and shape the stories we tell. The start of the Anne Spencer: Harlem South will always be shaped by Aleyshka Esteven’s willingness to take on this challenge and run with it. She is one of the best research assistants I’ve ever worked with, really gifted in the skill of literary scholarship and digital project design. In the coming school year, we hope to have some UVA undergraduate interns to engage with the project. Meanwhile I will be reaching out to experts, here and elsewhere, on Lynchburg and the Harlem Renaissance. We will work out an agreement for collaboration and permissions with Shaun Spencer-Hester, as we apply for funding. 
We don’t want to make the wrong moves, when a research university appropriates indigenous materials or claims discovery of heritage that has its own substantial preservation. But there is a collaborative role to play, and a great deal of room for amplifying the meanings of this site and archive. The papers in UVA’s Special Collections are still largely inaccessible to the public. And the more you know about this biographical topos (place, topic) the more interesting, rare, and important it is. It is one of a handful of museums dedicated to an African American woman, and perhaps the only one in the former home of an African American woman writer. It serves as a salon, in the French sense, and a sanctuary within Jim Crow, a triumph of real estate within disenfranchisement.   I emphasized two main points: The Domestic is Political; and Harlem Is in Lynchburg. That is, the very spatial differences, points or boundaries, that our study marks are transactional and unstable.  With African, European, and Native American antecedents, this is an elite salon, as Wordsworth’s Rydall Mount is elite; Lynchburg newspapers record that any notable visitor in Lynchburg, white or black, visited at the Spencers’. We’re hoping not just to repeat the list of the famous who came there, but to exhibit themes that reveal more than the sweet lady poet in her home and garden. In this house she co-founded the Lynchburg branch of the NAACP, and hosted (or traveled to visit) a range of participants in a cultural movement associated with the New York hub, Harlem. Our view is that the refuge of the house and garden was a critique of a city with segregated transportation and theaters, communities of Blacks and Whites that enforced class and gender norms. Anne Spencer wore clothing she preferred (sometimes trousers before it was OK for women to wear them); she entertained whoever she pleased, including her friends who were housekeepers and her friends who were white. As you find out about people mentioned in the house—close friend, the artist and architect Amaza Lee Meredith—or included in the archive and biography—Murrell Edmunds, UVA alumnus, white Lynchburg writer who used to visit with Anne to talk about writing, you see another framework for the project, LGBTQ Lynchburg, or more likely, how anyone gay moved away (as Meredith and Edmunds did) if they could. Public records include the son, Chauncey Spencer, who helped integrate the airforce and was ostracized as a communist before he held positions in California and Michigan high schools and police departments. The lives of Spencer daughters and grandchildren also should be mapped, as ramifications of this early-twentieth-century declaration of cultural equality.
At this point, the project postpones the common directions of literary DH (e.g. digital editions or textual analysis) to experiment with maps and timelines. We do plan various approaches to pilot what a grant-funded research-pedagogy project could do to amplify and complement the cultural-heritage site. The proposed angles on the topos or place include:
•	augment the 360-degree tour of the house with annotations of rooms, audio, and images of texts (thanks to VR specialist Arin Bennett for scoping software needs and consultation with Peter Hedlund of Encyclopedia of Virginia), excerpting from audio of Chauncey and Shaun Spencer
•	3D models of objects in the museum, printable for use in school lessons 
•	digitize more of the Anne Spencer archive, and coordinate with the additional papers still on site. Design effective online experiences of a writer’s practice that rarely resulted in a single finished work: drafts written on walls, on seed catalogues or account books; hybrid of prose and verse genres. Students could see stages of composition, linking from rooms and images of manuscript, with an interface that allows them to offer transcriptions of handwritten work.
•	Neatline project based on the Timeline and StoryMap work laid out in summer 2019 

