---
author: amanda-visconti
date: 2019-02-21
layout: post
slug: dh-dissertation-to-director
title: "DH Dissertation to Director"
categories:
- Digital Humanities
tags:
- Digital Humanities
---

Katina Rogers
"I am working on book revisions (https://www.hastac.org/blogs/katina-rogers/2018/01/09/putting-humanities-phd-work [hastac.org])... I refer to your dissertation quite a bit in the book... What do you find yourself drawing on from that process in your work at the Scholars' Lab? Any reflections you want to share on taking risks, project-based work, learning how to run a program—really whatever you find most striking would be wonderful to include."

1. Digital humanities < experimental humanities. Getting to do an unusually shaped dissertation meant doing a lot of meta-dissertational work analyzing and synthesizing precedents for making as scholarship, dissertations that didn’t focus on chapters, and experimental methods and formats in general. I not only needed to prove that such work could reach the goals of a dissertation, but that it also fit the goals of my particular areas of research. It was profoundly useful to work through what I thought, and then convince others as well. Not that I want to add barriers to the dissertation process for anyone, but it strikes me as unfortunate that most humanities dissertation creators aren’t supported in arguing for why their format is the best one for their research questions, rather than treating written chapters as the obvious choice.
 
The Scholars’ Lab has historical prominence as a DH center, but we also offer other areas of expertise such as GIS and cultural heritage informatics. Some of my work at the Lab has been collaborating with my colleagues to update our understanding of what’s most important to us, and to relaunch our Lab website (ScholarsLab.org) to better represent that updated mission. I think my dissertation experience helped me do a better job of hearing and synthesizing our staff’s visions for the Lab: rather than force everything into the rubric of DH, we’ve identified a shared commitment to questioning assumptions around the methods and publication formats of scholarship, to cultivating a readiness to experiment and create new approaches where existing ones don’t best fit our research questions. It’s the experimental mindset of DH that drives us—as you can see in partially or wholly analog ventures like our Makerspace and campus community design work—rather than something particular to the digital.
 
2. Passing it on. I have been extremely lucky, from the superlative MITH and UMD English Department smart and caring mentorship that allowed me to realize my unusual dissertation, to getting to work at the Scholars' Lab, where the amazing staff have long, successfully made it their mission to model and nurture a generous and human-centered digital humanities. (If it matters, between those two I was tenure-track faculty: so yes, weird DH scholarship can fit into that career path, but also there are so many careers out there that offer a scholar so much more).
 
My dissertation experience was an extremely lucky one: I had incredible mentors as my dissertation committee (Matt Kirschenbaum as advisor; Kari Kraus, Neil Fraistat, Melanie Kill, Brian Richardson). They met with me throughout the dissertation process to give me feedback and help us make sure that, for a very non-traditionally shaped dissertation, we were all on the same page as to expectations for the final outcome. They all had this unusual combination of innovative scholarship mixed with humanity and generosity. I've heard people say that either your advisor is nice to you but doesn't push your work forward, or they're mean (how is this not just a thing, but a fairly common one?) but make your work better. Every interaction I had with my committee was a kind one, and yet they constantly challenged me to do better. Criticism was never about not being good enough, it was about generating something even better.
 
Having mentors modeling this approach to scholarship made me determined to pass on the impact of their gift to other folks I encounter, as best I can. To work so that the luck and privilege that allowed me to do my dissertation become standard resources for anyone. To put my heart into Scholars’ Lab’s goal of training the next generation of scholars to be the scholarly community we want to exist, and to take responsibility for my tiny snowflake in the storm of what DH is (e.g. think through the impact of my doing my dissertation around a canon work by a white, male, Anglo, cis author; and change my scholarly trajectory to respond to the problems that investigation raised for me).
 
3. Scholarship is people. I read Mark Sample’s excellent “When does service become scholarship?” while dissertating, and I’ve paraphrased his argument to make my own definition of scholarship: one part critical thinking + one part communicating the results of that thinking. Critical thinking can be accomplished through many methods, including research, writing, coding, building, designing, experimenting, and play. Communicating critical thinking can take the form of traditional publishing or other forms of “making public” such as tweeting and blogging, teaching, sharing open source code, or any other way for your intellectual community to learn from, critique, evaluate, and/or build on your work.
 
This definition says: anyone trying to think well and share their work is part of the scholarly conversation. It brings the scholarly community into focus as the goal of our research work—with the implicit belief that the work of care, respect, mentoring, amplifying your community members is not just a “nice” characteristic taking second place to the completely broken concepts of “rigor” or “brilliance”, not just “eulogy worthy”, but by definition a necessary part of being a scholar. This definition recognizes the brilliance of project managers, teachers, students, librarians, more folks than I can name here: all as much (or more) a part of building community knowledge and abilities as the professor who writes a book. It fits with the Scholars’ Lab’s unofficial moto of “people over projects”: focusing on community knowledge and health as the goal and research as the means, rather than the other way around.
 
4. Documentation is scholarship: I spent around 6 months of my dissertation building something on an Islandora-based framework, and then ended up not using that server and code work in the final digital edition. But because I documented throughout why I was making certain technical and design choices, how the technical work developed my critical thinking, I had that research to share with my intellectual community, and I wasn't six months behind on my dissertation.
 
In my work today, I encourage others to share their notes, design choices, and other documentation as they go; it’s better for the community, and I think it’s also better for scholars new to a method to know they can start giving back to the community right away (e.g. What do you know now that you didn’t understand a week ago? Write for the person you were a week ago).
