---
title: First Steps with NLP and a Collection of Amiri Baraka's Poetry
permalink: /uncategorized/first-steps-with-nlp-and-a-collection-of-amiri-barakas-poetry/
author: ethan-reed
date: 2017/11/30 15:27:04+00:00
slug: first-steps-with-nlp-and-a-collection-of-amiri-barakas-poetry
layout: post
---

# First Steps with NLP and a Collection of Amiri Baraka's Poetry

**Amiri Baraka’s _Black Magic_, 1969** In this post I’ll discuss my initial foray into natural language processing (NLP)—cleaning up a corpus and prepping it for some basic text analysis techniques. I want to begin, however, with a note on the small textual corpus that I’m using in these preliminary explorations—_Black Magic_, a 1969 collection of three books of poetry by Amiri Baraka. In a prefatory note to the collection, Baraka offers an “Explanation of the Work” that touches on the three books of poetry contained within. “_Sabotage_,” he writes of the first book, “meant I had come to see the superstructure of filth Americans call their way of life, and wanted to see it fall. To sabotage it,” in a word. The second book, he argues, takes this intensity even further: “But _Target Study_ is trying to really study, like bomber crews do the soon to be destroyed cities. Less passive now, less uselessly ‘literary.’” If these comments are any indication, the poetry of _Black Magic_ has a certain level of emotional and political intensity. These poems articulate rage—they thunder, fulminate, and protest, venting a vindicated anger at racial injustice in America. Others simmer with a more restrained heat, but still tend to employ an often unsettling rhetorical violence. Consider, for example, the conclusion of a poem from Sabotage titled “A POEM SOME PEOPLE WILL HAVE TO UNDERSTAND”: 

> We have awaited the coming of a natural phenomenon. Mystics and romantics, knowledgeable workers of the land. But none has come. (repeat) but none has come. Will the machinegunners please step forward?

Though startling, this final image punctuates a familiar narrative: the mounting of frustration, the boiling over of feeling while waiting and waiting for justice. The speaker’s closing remark seems to respond to the question asked in [Langston Hughes’s poem "Harlem"](https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/46548/harlem)—"What happens to a dream deferred?”—but raises the ante of the inquiry, and shifts from Hughes’s suggestive but still open-ended conclusion (“_Or does it explode?_”) to an unsettling direct request (“Will the machinegunners please step forward?”). The poem also, however, seems aware of its high dramatic tone: it conveys the gravity of this deferred deliverance with somewhat formal rhetoric like “We have awaited” and “But none has come”, but highlights—and perhaps undercuts—its own theatricality by embedding a stage direction in the poem, “(repeat)”. We’ve waited for long enough, the poem seems to argue, but stages this claim in such a way that the final line’s delivery hangs suspended somewhere between deadpan and dead serious. In short: a heightened revolutionary rhetoric permeates the poems in this collection. Many have noted, however, that a troubling violence permeates them as well. For example, [one scholar describes](https://www.jstor.org/stable/1512315?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents) “Black Art”—one of the most graphic but also most well-known poems from this collection—as “a difficult poem in its race and gender violence, in its violence against peoples.” In the 1991 _The Leroi Jones/Amiri Baraka Reader_, editor William J. Harris describes _Black Magic_ as a collection in which Baraka “traces his painful exit from the white world and his entry into blackness,” an “exorcism of white consciousness and values [that] included a ten-year period of professed hatred of whites, and most especially jews [sic].” Baraka looks back at this period in [his 1984 autobiography](https://books.google.com/books?id=Z-C4E3zdBxkC&q=snarling#v=onepage&q=%22struggling%20to%20be%20born%22&f=false) at a remove from the red-hot intensity of the poems themselves: “I guess, during this period, I got the reputation for being a snarling, white-hating madman. There was some truth to it, because I was struggling to be born, to break out from the shell I could instinctively sense surrounded my own dash for freedom.” From this perspective, this is the violence of escape, of “struggling to be born” from within a constricting “shell”—a version, perhaps, of the violence of the deferred dream that explodes at the end of Langston Hughes’s poem “Harlem.” **Initial Steps with NLP** As a scholar interested in articulations of anger, resentment, and frustration with injustice—particularly injustice of a systemic and institutional nature—as well as digital methodologies, I thought these texts in particular might be worth looking at more closely with NLP techniques. As a graduate student working in a period that is almost entirely still in copyright, however, _Black Magic_ also interested me because it is a small corpus of works—three books of poetry—to which I currently have access through UVA. Though conceptually unglamorous, basic questions of access have played an enormous role in determining the initial paths in my scholarly decision-making process. In this sense, though assembling workable data is always a challenge, scholars interested in literary texts prior to the early 20th century have more options for readily accessible textual corpora. For 20th- and 21st-century scholars interested in textual analysis, however, questions of copyright have made finding openly available textual data from which a corpus could be built an extremely difficult task: while able to share results of analyses through transformative, non-consumptive use, scholars of these periods cannot share the corpora from which these insights are drawn. This presents additional challenges in terms of reproducibility as well as in the already long, labor-intensive task of assembling, cleaning, and prepping a corpus prior to any actual application of NLP techniques. If texts aren’t already available as text files through a university or institution, they either have to be typed out by hand or scanned page by page, run through optical recognition software that transforms the page image into text, then also ultimately cleaned and corrected by hand. In short: no preexisting corpora means no experiments, prototypes, or conceptual ventures without surmounting certain barriers to entry that often prove time- or cost-prohibitive. In the case of this project, even though UVA has access to the 1969 edition of _Black Magic: Collected Poetry 1961-1967_, the text isn’t ready for NLP out-of-the-box. The page contained a lot of text beyond that of the literary work in question: page numbers, line numbers, bibliographical information, headers and footers, all kinds of weird punctuation, and so on. For example, the title of the first poem in _Sabotage_, “Three Modes of History and Culture,” appeared in this electronic edition as follows: 

> Baraka, Imamu Amiri, 1934- : Three Modes of History and Culture [from Black Magic: Collected Poetry 1961-1967 (1969) , The Bobbs-Merrill Company ]

To perform sentiment analysis on _Sabotage_, then, I first needed to get the raw text. By “raw text” I mean a big bag of all of _Sabotage_’s words. My goal initially was to get this bag of words with no line numbers, no punctuation, no capitalized first letters (otherwise Python would think they were two different words), and no spaces. As someone doing this work for the first time, I felt like I could handle writing a program that would remove capital letters, get the txt file into the correct file-type, maybe even get rid of the line numbers. But what about all this clutter surrounding the title of each poem? I considered how I might remove this with a program, but even something as small as irregular line breaks means the words would be chopped up in slightly different ways each time. Given the size of the corpus, I decided it would be [wiser to remove the clutter by hand](https://xkcd.com/1319/) than to write a one-time program that automated it.